Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 43

The Loudin series converges on Samonios in the *“matus
months, counting primarily in the first half of the year, and the laget
series converges on Giamonios in the *anmatus months, counting
primarily in the second half of the year. In each series days 1-8 are
directly labeled PRINNI LOVDIN and PRINNI LAGET. The term
PRINNI clearly applies to the whole series even though the actual
labeling does not extend beyond day 9. Only days 1 and 7 of the
labeled series actually occur on the solstices. It should be noted that
when one solstice occurs on day 1 the next solstice, six months later,
always occurs on day 7. In the other months the days indicated as
PRINNI are assumed to count the falling behind of the sun with respect
to the calendar.

Although the significance of PRINNIis clear, its etymology is
not. A relationship to *kųrei- "to buy" (IEW: 648), as in Irish crenid
and Welsh prynu "to buy, to redeem" (*kųri-n-), does not seem to make
much sense, unless in the sense of "buying time".

The term PRINNI might also refer to the sun’s falling behind
the calendar. If so, it might relate to Welsh prinhau "to diminish, to
become scarce" and to Irish crínaid "to fade, wither away". Thus
PRINNI may refer to the "fading back" of the sun. But this etymology
also seems doubtful, since the solar pathway waxes as well as wanes,
which would juxtapose "increasing" with "fading back".

More likely a variant of *kųer- "to make or shape" (IEW: 641)
is indicated here. Significantly Welsh pryd, derived from the zero-
grade form *kųr-tu- (EW: 641), indicates "time" as well as "form".
Perhaps an n-expansion of this root lies behind Welsh prynhawn
"afternoon" (from pryn nawn?). Irish cruth indicates "form, shape, way,
appearance’. The -i and -o alternation in the ending of PRINNI and
PRINNO perhaps suggest an io-stem. The significance of *prinnio-
would then be "form, shape, way, time, period”.

At any rate, the term is clearly used to count out the pathway
of the sun between solstices. The PRINNI LOVDIN series thus counts
the solar path while the sun is rising in the sky, going from south to
north in the period from midwinter to midsummer. During this period
the days get longer and longer. The PRINNI LAGET series thus counts
out the solar path while the sun is lowering in the sky, going from north
to south in the period from midsummer to midwinter. During this
period the days get shorter and shorter. At the anomalous days, the
falling sun series is assumed to continue even following the winter
