28 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

possibilities for the significance of SEMIVISON. In this light the first
stem semi- may be related to *sem- “summer” (IEW: 905) as readily as
to *semi- “half” (EW: 905).

Pinault, however, was correct in his Gnomen criticism of my
1992 work (1996: 710) to suggest that the utilization and significance
of a term need not necessarily coincide with its etymology. Where the
expanded forms of the abbreviations and their etymologies seem
transparent, nonetheless, I have no hesitation in suggesting not only
what the expanded form was but in utilizing it as such in the analysis
of the functioning of the calendar. Where the etymologies are less
certain, [enclose the expanded form in question marks (?...?). It should
be clear that the function and significance of the abbreviations is much
more certain than their expanded forms and possible etymologies.
Where the abbreviations differ, but clearly signify the same term, all of
the abbreviated forms are first collated to eliminate errors in transcrip-
tion and to develop the fullest form possible of the abbreviated term.

AMB: ?

AMB occurs at days 5 and 11 in the fortnight before the
atenoux (dividing the month into two halves) and at the odd days
except for day 1 in the fortnight after the atenoux (thus days 5, 11, 3a,
5a, 7a, 9a, 11a, 13a, 15a). Notably then, AMB occurs only on odd days.
In the matus "complete, orderly" 30-day months the days which are not
labeled D AMB are designated by M D for *matus divos "good day" or
“orderly day’. Since the D is apparently the same abbreviation in M D
and D AMB, the significance of D AMB, which thus must stand for
*divos amb-, would seem to contrast with M D, standing for *matus
divos "good day".

On analogy with ANM for *anmatus, Mac Neill (1928, 33)
suggested that AMB stands for the Gaulish negative prefix an-, derived
from IE *n- (IEW: 757-8), followed by a word beginning in b-. If
AMB, beginning with a negative prefix, is then to contrast with matus
"good, complete, orderly" , the significance of B(...) may be similar in
context to that of matus. But just what this term may have been is
anybody’s guess (perhaps Irish bil “good, fortunate”, glossed by
O’Clery as maith is relevant). However, it is by no means certain that
Mac Neill’s suggestion is correct.

Since the MAT (matus) months contrast with the ANM
(anmatus) months, it is reasonable to conclude that the M D (matus
