Introduction

The fragmentary calendar plate from Coligny (near Lyons)
apparently dates to the second-century AD, although the Gaulish
calendar engraved on this plate is plainly the result of a long transmis-
sion process. The 25-year-cycle calendar, the final system of this
transmission process, probably originated early in the first-century BC,
before Caesar’s conquest. It is within this late pre-Roman period that
the calendar took on its final form and notation to enter a two-century
long transmission process during which many copying errors were
introduced (Olmsted 1992: tab. 58).

Embedded within the notation of the 25-year-cycle Coligny
calendar is a 30-year-cycle calendar. The notation on the Coligny plate
indicates that the original constant-lunar 30-year-cycle calendar system
(from which the later shifting lunar calendar developed) had each
month begin on the first day of the new moon. In contrast Plinius states
(Naturalis Historia, XVI: 250; perhaps taken from observations of
Poseidonius) that the months and years of the 30-year-cycle Gaulish
calendar began on the sixth day of the moon.

Est autem id rarum admodum inventu et repertum
magna religione petitur et ante omnia sexta luna, quae
principia mensum annorumque his facit, et saeculi
post tricesimum annum, quia iam virium abunde
habeat nec sit sui dimidia (Zwicker 1934: 55).

Plinius’s statement implies that the earliest Gaulish calendar originated
some 1000 years before the period of the observation he recorded. The
earliest of the surviving Gaulish calendrical systems had its origins
clearly in the late Bronze Age. This 1000-year span of the 30-year
calendar is an inevitable conclusion of Plinius’s statement. The 30-
year-cycle constant lunar calendar runs ahead of the moon by 1 day
every 199 years (Olmsted 1992: 70-71, 132-133). Though the months
originally began on the first day of the moon, after 1000 years of
operation of the calendar the months would have shifted to beginning
on the sixth day of the moon.

Because of its long evolutionary development with earlier
stages still embedded within the later calendar, the Coligny calendar
gives a unique window into the astronomical capabilities of a suppos-
edly barbarian people, the Celts of pre-Roman Gaul. The calendar also
