Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 17

duodecim "twelve" to develop *trideciomos. More likely then is
*tritios deciomos (dative = ?tritiu deciomu?) or perhaps compounded
as “tritio-deciomos (dative *tritio-deciomu) for the original form
behind *TRICIOMV.

The N-Counting Scheme

The N-counting scheme represents the first stage in the
development of the procedures to predict the position of the sun with
respect to the lunar-based calendar. Since the intercalary months
recapitulate the pathway of the sun with respect to the calendar,
superficially the N-counting scheme might seem to have developed
from the notation of the intercalary months. MacNeill (1926: 40) was
the earliest researcher to note that N "falls at dates from which the days
of the intercalary months derive their notation". MacNeill’s proposal
was later catalogued by Duval in 1966 (277-88). However, like
MacNeill, Duval failed to understand N’s true significance, labelling it
"N commémoratif'. Duval, thus, adopted MacNeill’s erroneous view
that the N’s represent a commemoration of the days utilized in the
intercalary notation.

In spite of the failure of previous researchers to grasp its
significance, the N-counting scheme works in a simple straight-forward
fashion. Considering the other counting schemes on the calendar, there
can be no doubt whatsoever as to the function of N. With each month’s
advance, the calendar simply indicates a 1-day advance in the notation
N (see Olmsted 1992: table 20). Here N stands for *noux "night" and
is itself a shortening of NS, presumably for *noux sonno "anight of the
sun". During a *noux sonno the calendar priests apparently assumed
that the sun retraced backwards the progress it made during the course
of that day. Such a 1-day retrenchment each month would then explain
the 1-day lag behind the moon each month. This 1-day advance in N
thus accounts for the roughly 1-day lag of the sun behind the moon
with each passing month. Since there are 29.531 days in a lunar month,
but 30.437 days in 1/12 a solar year, in the course of a month the sun
actually lags behind the moon by 0.906 days, which is close to 1 day.

The connection between the days labeled N and the notation of
the intercalary months is in reality somewhat fortuitous, although both
derive from the same ultimate source. The notation of the intercalary
months corresponds to the 30 days added to the calendar to make up for
the 1-day lag of the sun behind the calendar which is supposed to occur
