22 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

equinox when the sun rise occurs between one to two minutes later
each day and the sun set occurs between one to two minutes earlier
each day. The maximum time around 74 minutes for the new and full
moons are reached during the vernal equinox when the sun rise occurs
between two to three minutes earlier each day and the sun sets between
two to three minutes later each day. The maximum and minimum time
of the daily lunar fall-back around the first and last quarter moons
occurs at the solstices, when the sun and moon reach their maximum
perpendicularity. The full moon rises at twilight in the evening almost
exactly 1 hour later than the previous day at the date closest to the
winter solstice, and the new moon sets at twilight in the evening almost
exactly 1 hour later than the previous day at the date closest to the
summer solstice, which may be the original reason for the day being
divided up into two periods of 12 hours each.

Also one might note that in traversing from Midwinter to
Midsummer solstice in the region of Traverse City, Michigan (45
degrees, at approximately the same latitude as Lyons, 46 degrees), the
hours of daylight increase from 9 hours a day to 15 hours a day with 12
hours of daylight at the equinox. Thus the length of time the sun shines
each day gains or loses approximately 1 hour each month depending on
whether or not one is in the rising half of year or the falling half of the
year.

To follow the trajectory of the moon each month, a simple
counting scheme could assume that the moon falls back 12 hours with
respect to sunlight in each fortnight of fifteen days, and over the long
run it would be accurate to around + 2%. The easiest way to construct
such a scheme would be to assume that during the period between the
full moon and the new moon, the moon will rise an hour later each day,
and during the period between the new moon and the full moon, the
moon will set an hour later each day, but it will skip the count for 3
days in each such fortnight. Such a scheme also could be effected by
counting backward every fifth day except for day fifteen.

This regimen of counting backward approximately every fifth
day fits the pattern of the notation D AMB in the first fortnight of the
Coligny calendar, as this notation occurs on days V and XI. A similar
fall back is assumed for the sun in the concept of the noux sonno
outlined above in counting out the supposed fallback of the sun vis-a-
vis lunar time by one day each month. In the noux sonno scheme, the
sun is assumed to retrace its pathway backwards during the night so
that it begins the next day at the same position as the previous day.
