36 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

in these two months LAGET occurs twice: once on day | and day 2
respectively, and again on day 7 and day 8 respectively.

There are 60 regular months (+ 2 intercalary months) in the
five-year period shown on the calendar. Since 30 of the 60 regular
months are ANM (6 out of 12 in any given year), the complete PRINNI
count would not be reached until the end of a five-year period.
Nonetheless, by switching from the loudin series to the laget series and
vice versa, which adds three days at each shift, day 30 is actually
reached in half that time.

Because of its usage on a calendar, LAGET might be seen to
be cognate with Irish Jog "flame. It also might be seen to derive from
an extended form of IE *plŌ- "bright, to burn, warm" (IEW: 805),
possibly giving Welsh go-leu "light". But these suppositions do not suit
well the fact that for 26 out of 29 days, the counting takes place in the
six months from Giamonios to Samonios, a period when the solar
pathway is daily apparently lowering in the sky. As we have seen,
Giamonios and Samonios mark the two solstices of the year. Dividing
the year into two halves at the solstices does not create a bright and a
dark half. Thus these etymologies have little conviction.

The important consideration in a calendar oriented around the
two solstices is that in the northern hemisphere the sun is rising in the
sky (heading north) for the six months of the year between the summer
solstice and the winter solstice and falling in the sky (heading south)
for the six months between the summer solstice and the winter solstice.
Thus the solstices divide the year into two periods, from midwinter to
midsummer when the sun is daily rising in the sky or waxing, and from
midsummer to midwinter when the sun is daily getting lower in the sky
or waning.

Thurneysen (1899, 529) sought an etymology for LAGET in
Irish laigiu and Welsh llai "smaller" and in Irish Jagat "diminution,
smallness" from IE *lgųh-, Celtic *lag-, (IEW: 661), apparently
combined with the adjectival suffix -ito-. I believe he was essentially
correct. The LAGET counting of the solar path then takes place in the
six months of the year when the sun is declining in the sky and when
the daytime is decreasing, from the summer solstice to the winter
solstice. Thus it seems certain that LAGET indicates "diminishing".
This etymology would then confirm that the summer solstice occurs in
Giamonios.
