Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 31

perhaps through vowel raising. It is uncertain whether or not -ou-
stands for a diphthong or it represents a transcription from an earlier
calendar written in archaic Gaulish with Greek lettering and epigraphy
(for *atenucts), after the significance of the original archaic term had
been forgotten.

If the original purpose of the term ATENOVX was to divide
the month into waxing and waning halves, its significance is probably
"returning night” or "increasing night". The use of atenoux “increasing
nighttime” suggests the 25-year cycle with its shifting lunar cycle post-
dates the use of the expression. Thus the term atenoux is another
indication that the 30-year cycle, which followed the lunar phases
almost exactly, preceded the 25-year cycle. In the thirty-year constant-
lunar calendar, day 16 would correspond to the full moon with day 1
corresponding to the new moon and 29.5306 days per lunar month.
Each night following the full moon would increase in darkness as the
moon decreases in size each night and appears later by nearly an
additional hour each night in its time of rising. There is independent
evidence that such a thirty-year cycle was indeed the system of the
earliest-known Gaulish calendar (1992: 132-134), not to mention again
Plinius.

In the 25-year cycle with the lunar phases advancing 5 days in
each 25-year period no such correlation with constant moon phases is
possible. If Samonios 1, year 1, begins at the winter solstice on the new
moon (it's darkest phase), then 77 1/2 years later Giamonios 1, year 78,
will begin on the summer solstice on the full moon (day 16). The lunar
and solar cycles will then shift through waxing and waning cycles
every 77 1/2 years.

The origin of the term ATENOVX must date to the period
before the 25-year cycle, since it clearly refers to fixed lunar condi-
tions. ATENOVX "returning night" therefore refers to the period
beginning with the full moon, which at the origin of the 30-year cycle
would have occurred on day la. At first sight this reference to returning
night at the full moon seems paradoxical. However, we must remember
that the full moon begins the waning fortnight. "Returning night" does
aptly describe the process of the moon waning, with the crescent
getting smaller and smaller and appearing later and later in the evening
as the nights grow increasingly darker and darker. “Returning night”
also describes the process of the ever-increasing period of darkness
during the month in which the sunset precedes the moon rise by
roughly an hour longer each day until the new moon.
