4 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

The foremost question in my mind at the time of my original
study was whether or not in every instance there actually was room
enough in the lacunae separating the surviving fragments of the
calendar to contain the missing notation suggested by the patterns
apparent in the surviving notation. The actual computer-generated
photographic reconstruction of the calendar presented here was
developed to alleviate these concerns.

Using a photo-processing program (Adobe Photoshop V)
segments duplicating the missing notation were copied from surviving
fragments of the Coligny calendar and then were utilized to fill in the
missing sequences on the calendar maintaining the original spatial
integrity of the fragmentary mosaic (originally reproduced digitally at
high resolution from the RIG: III originals to ¾ scale and 1200 dpi
halftone, but of necessity depicted here at much lower resolution in the
month plates to ½ scale and 300 dpi grayscale to comply with the
printer’s specifications and shown in plates 2 and 3 at about 1/8 scale).
Indeed, the original fragmentary mosaic (plate 2) is still embedded in
the digitally-reconstructed whole calendar (plate 3). Thus the fragmen-
tary calendar was brought to photographic completion utilizing the
original wording and engraving to be found on the surviving fragments.

As the photographic reproduction presented here actually
preserves the original fragments of the calendar, the typescript
reconstruction presented in my 1992 study is shown to be one which fits
within the parameters of the original calendar and lines up with the
surviving notation. The reconstruction of the calendar based upon the
date patterns of the surviving notation presented in my previous studies
do indeed fit convincingly within the lacunae. Furthermore, these
reconstructions fit within the alignments for the notation worked out by
the original engravers of the calendar.

Except for a few insignificant changes in word order or in the
wording of the abbreviations probably utilized in specific locations, in
only a single instance was a correction in the nature of the notation
developed in my 1992 study actually necessary. On day 5 of month 12
Cantlos in year 5 (see plates) the IIT notation should not be indicated
alongside of N, even though IIT is the correct mark for that date. It is
also now clear that the fuller phrase DS MA NS cannot occur on day
15 of month 5 Ogronios in year 3 (as suggested in my 1992 study)
simply because there is not enough room in the lacuna, and the shorter
abbreviation NS DS for the same term must have been used here
instead.

But for these minor corrections having no significance for the
operation of the calendar, this computer-driven photographic recon-
