AO Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

clearly indicated in the single N on Edrinios 30, which functionally
parallels the NSDS found on Dumannios 29 and on Simivisonna 29 and
30 (see 1992: table 38). Here N can simply be expanded to the fuller
phrase NS or NSDS. However, note carefully that the N of N INISR
has nothing to do with the sun and is a purely lunar notation. Thus the
N in the phrase N INIS R simply indicates NOVX "night" and cannot
be expanded to NOVX SONNO.

The usage of the full phrase NSDS is also clear, as outlined
above under N. The term functions to count each approximate one-day
fall-back of the sun with the passage of each month, resulting from the
solar year being approximately 10 1/4 days longer than 12 lunar
months. Thus it is clear that the abbreviation should contain a reference
to *sonns. Here DS presumably stands for *divos rather than *divos
sonno, for no point (-) is ever found to separate the D from the S, as
occurs between N and S in DS MA - N -S on Int-2 day 15. In Int-2 the
point (-) clarifies that N and S are indeed separate terms. Nonetheless,
one should note the remote possibility that DS stands for *divos sonno
"day of the sun", a seemingly redundant term.

NOVX: "night".

This word occurs in combination as -NVX, -NO, -VX, and
-NOVX in TRINVX, TRINO, PETIVX, and ATENOVX and inde-
pendently as N as outlined above. NOVX must derive from IE *nok1-t-
s "night" (IEW: 762), giving Welsh nos "night" and Irish i-nnocht
"tonight", but why a form with -ou- rather than -o- occurs on the
calendar is uncertain (see ATENOVX, above). The use of noux rather
than *divos for the third day of Samonios, the TRI(TIO)NOVX, and for
the fourth of Rivros, the PET(VOR)I(NO)VX, arises clearly from the
lunar phase mark IIT associated with both dates and used in counting
the *noux sonno solar pathway. In the TII counting scheme the TII
mark indicating the lunar week phase which occurs at the beginning of
the month clearly takes the place of N or NS for *noux sonno.

Like the TII marks NS is added to and occurs alongside of the
ordinary notation to be found on a particular day. Except for the fact
that the TI marks are never shown where NS occurs or where single
N with the significance N(S) occurs, all other notation is normal. NS
is then used synonymously for any of the three TII marks, TI], ITI, or
IIT, except that it can also occur where a TII mark is suppressed or
