32 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar
D: DS: *divos: "day".

This term occurs independently frequently as DS and D, and
apparently once as DIB (1-12-29), where the context DIB CANT
clearly suggests the significance “a day of Cantlos”. It apparently also
occurs in compounds as -DIV and -D (in SINDIV and SIND), and also
probably as DIV- and DIVO- Gin DIVERTOMV, DIVORTOMV). The
stem here is likely to be the *divo- "day" suggested by Dottin (1918,
252). This stem would derive from the y-enlarged IE root *diy- "day"
(IEW: 185). Here then SINDIV would indicate "this day, on this day,
today" cognate with Irish indiu. Thurneysen (1946: 217) saw Irish
(in-)diu as derived from “the dative (instrumental) of a neuter stem
diwo-, cp. Skt. diva ‘by day’”. Lambert (1995: 112) would see *diion
as the Gaulish word, rather than Thurneysen’s *divon, with sindiu as
the locatif of *sindiion. Pokorny (IEW: 185) notes the old Latin
nominative diéus, which would correspond to a Gaulish *diios rather
than *diion. Pokorny (IEW: 185) saw Irish indiu as developed from
*_diju, also giving the Latin locative or dative diUZ.

One might try to analyze the context of its occurrence to
resolve the question of what is indicated by the full or abbreviated form
SINDIV (the full form for *sindiu in the dative or locative, or an
abbreviation for *sindivos or *sindivon). SINDIV occurs in month 1,
year 1,as M D TRICTI)DNO SAM - SINDIV and in month 1, year 4, as
II (M) D TRINV SAM SINDIV. Here the corrupt form PRINI occurs
in place of TRI(TDNV. Month 1, year 2, has (M)D TRI(TDNVX
SAMO and month 1, year 5 has MD TRINO SAMONT, again with the
corruption PRINO for the expected *TRINO. The full phrase can be
reconstructed as MD TRI(TIO)NOVX SAMONI SINDIV. As the
seventeenth day (ATENOVX day 2) of Samonios is transferred from
the third day of Samonios, the phrase must indicate “an orderly day, the
third night of Samonios, this day’, “an orderly day, the third night of
Samonios, on this day” or “an orderly day, the third night of Samonios,
to this day”. In this semantic context SINDIV could be either an
abbreviation for the nominative singular, or the full form of the locative
singular or the dative singular.

Since the forms DS and D freely interchange with no differ-
ence in meaning as in DSMA-N-S RIVR found on the fifteenth day of
the second intercalary month for the usual form NSDS, here DIMA
clearly is a longer form of DM, which occurs in place of MD on month
1, year 1, on days 12, 13, 14, and 15. Here the DS form is an abbrevia-
