14 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

If as seems likely, and indeed is actually demanded in the
evolution of the calendar scheme itself, a 30-year cycle which closely
followed the moon, preceded the 25-year calendar with its shifting
lunar phases, a good motivation can be seen for the change from the
30-year to the 25-year cycle. The 25-year cycle was 4 times more
accurate in its prediction of solar positions and nearly 3 times more
accurate in its prediction of lunar position. Indeed through this scheme
Gaulish calendar priests developed by far the most accurate solar and
lunar predictor in the ancient world.

The major reason the TII counting schemes have been difficult
to discern is that the TII marks were shifted along with the other day
notation in the schemes for shifting days within the months or between
months. However, one can work out the origins of these shifted days
precisely because each TII mark was shifted along with the rest of the
day from its original position on the calendar. Thus the shifted TII
marks are out of order with the schemes, and they can be returned to
their original positions, since this also returns the regularity to the
original pattern. Where these shifts do occur, the calendar indicates the
original position by naming the day and the month from which it was
shifted (Olmsted 1992: tab. 6c).

Thus D PETIRIVRI ANAG now found at Rivros 8a in year 3
and [D] PETIVX ANAG now found at Rivros 8a in year 2 come from
Anagantio day 4. M D or NOCIOM RIVRI or OCIOMV RIVRI now
found at Anagantio 4 in year 2, 3, 4, and 5 comes from Rivros 8a (day
23 = 8a in the notation of the calendar which recounts after the first
fortnight of 15 days (15 + 8 = 23)). The TI pattern across the 5-year
period given in the calendar guarantees that the shifts are correct. One
can easily reconstruct *pet(u)riu Anagant and *oc(t)iomu Rivri “from
the fourth of Anagantio” and “from the eighth of Rivros” for these days
which the TII pattern shows that they can only have been shifted from
day 4 of Anagantios and day 8a of Rivros through an interchange of
days. In a similar fashion trinux samo or trino samoni at Samonios 2a
(17) can be show from the TII pattern to come from Samonios 3 and [D
Du]m ele on Samonios 3 to come from Dumannios 2a. First Samonios
2a and Dumannios 2a exchanged days, and then Samonios 3 and
Samonios 2a exchanged days. Thus Samonios 3 now has the notation
[D Du]m ele and Samonios 2a has the notation trino Samoni or trinux
Samo. Putting the two abbreviations together, trinoux Samoni can be
expanded as tri(tio) noux Samoni “from the third night of Samonios”
(as petiux above could be expanded as pet(uar)iu (no)ux). The ele of [D
Du]m ele is at least suggestive of an abbreviation of a corrupted
Gaulish aliu, dative of alios (?*aleu?). There should be little problem
