42 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

which occurs only with the [VOS days while sun is in the PRINNI
LOVDIN "waxing pathway”.

A glance at table 14 in my 1992 work shows that this distribu-
tion is complementary to IVOS, which occurs on day 1 or 1a (in the
case of Rivros) and normally on the 2 or 3 days before and after day 1
or la, Otherwise, the distribution of N INNIS R is completely random
and has nothing to do with the sun or the solstices. N INNIS R then
occurs in the middle of a fortnight, while IVOS occurs around the
beginning and end of a fortnight. Like TVOS, N INNIS R must
therefore have an origin in the purely lunar 30-year calendar, which
predates the present 25-year calendar, since both clearly relate to fixed
dates within the month. N INNIS R is also used as a synonym for
GANO R or GO R, with which it interchanges freely.

No TI mark can occur on the same date as N INNIS R, though
N INNIS R is totally independent of these marks or the sun. However,
one should note that the count is still assumed to have taken place at
such a date, since it occurs as it normally should in the next month in
which it is found.

The term for the moon must be indicated somewhere on this
lunar/solar calendar. The terms for the sun occur as both the simple
letter S and in the genitive SONNO. Context here suggests that R
indicates the term for moon on the calendar. The same term occurs in
the fuller expression RIX RI for *rix rii “a measure of the moon”. Irish
ré "moon", as in ré nua "anew moon", seen as ultimately arising from
the significance of ré (i0, n) as "a lapse of time, interval of time", could
be a derivative of an original Celtic neuter 10-stem *rion, genitive *rii,
signifying both "moon" and "an interval of time". The IE root behind
this word is *rē- "to figure, to count" (IEW: 59, 60, 853), also giving
Irish rím and Welsh rhif "number". R and RI may then possibly be
expanded as *RION. N INNIS R therefore possibly might stand for
*noux innis(...) rii "night of an ?...? moon", but the full form of the
abbreviated term INNIS is uncertain here.

PRINNI: *prinnios: "? way, course, path?".

This term occurs in PRINNI LAGET and PRINNI LOVDIN
describing the two series of solstice marks TII (see table 8). It occurs
primarily as PRIN, PRINI, PRINNI, but in year 5 it occurs twice,
ending in -o rather than -i as PRINO (5-9-8) and PRINNO (5-6-4),
