44 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

solstice, and the rising sun series is assumed to continue even following
the summer solstice.

PRINNI LAGET thus probably refers to the "diminishing,
lowering, or waning pathway or (day)time". PRINNI LOVDIN, on the
other hand, probably refers to the "mounting up, increasing, or waxing
[solar] pathway or (day)time." These terms may then simply be
rendered as the "waning pathway" or "decreasing daytime" for PRINNI
LAGET and the "waxing pathway" or "increasing daytime" for PRINNI
LOVDIN.

The PRINNI count may be outlined as follows (Olmsted 1992:
table 28a). The count shifts between the MAT and ANM months at the
half-year boundaries. At each such boundary shift, the count adds 3
days. The anomalous days 29 and 30 are used after the first occurrence
of day 28 as a solstice in the intercalary month MI2, and they are not
used on the next occurrence of day 28 at Qutios M6. They then are
used after the first incidence of solstice day 28 in Cantlos A12, but they
are not used after the next day 28 in Cantlos A12 following. They then
are used following solstice day 28 in Qutios M6 and are not used on the
next day 28 in Qutios M6 following, and so on repeating this constant
pattern. The anomalous days 29 and 30 thus alternate in occurring and
not occurring following solstice day 28.

Similarly solstice day 28 first falls twice in month M6, the first
time counting 29 and 30, the second time not. It then falls twice in
month A12, the first time counting 29 and 30, the second time not.
After the anomalous days 29 and 30, the PRINNI will always fall on a
solstice on day 1. If the anomalous days 29 and 30 do not occur (as in
year 6), the PRINNI will always fall on a solstice on day 7. By this
simple alternating scheme the calendar always follows the solstices.

To determine in which month a solstice occurs, a simple rule
is also followed. The solstices occur in Samonios (M1) and Giamonios
(A7), except when an intercalary month (MI) occurs. The solstice
always falls in an intercalary month when this occurs. After the
intercalary month the prinni series counts in the regular fashion
indicated above until day 28, 29, or 30 is reached. Until these days are
reached, the solstices then fall in Cantlos (A12) and Cutios (M6). After
the count reaches 30, it reverts back to the M1 and A7 scheme of the
beginning.
