Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 37

LOVDIN: *loudinos: "waxing, increasing”.

This term occurs as LOD, LOVD, LOVDI, and LOVDIN (2-1-
7) in the phrase PRINNI LOVDIN and counts the first eight days of the
loudin half of the year in the solstice counting series. The prinni loudin
first occurs on day 1 of Samonios and the count increases by one day
for each of the matus "complete" months.

This term might be seen to describe the sun in the winter half
of the year. Assuming -ou- stands for -u-, again perhaps showing Greek
epigraphic influence as with ATENOVX, *ludin- might be seen as
cognate with Welsh Jludd "fatigue", luddiant "hindrance" and then
would derive from the zero-grade of IE */eud- "to stoop, bend down,
to make small" (IEW: 684). But I do not think this is very likely. A
major obstacle is that LOVDIN must be the opposite of LAGET. As we
have seen above LAGET means "waning, diminishing".

A more likely explanation of the term is that LOVDIN relates
to IE */eudh- "to mount up, grow" (IEW: 684), and that -ou- indicates
the Gaulish diphthong developed from IE -eu-. The zero-grade form in
*ludh-stu- (IEW:685) gives Irish Juss and Welsh /lysiau "plant (ie. that
which grows)". Perhaps here in LOVDIN, IE *leudh- "to mount up,
grow (IEW: 684) is combined with the suffix -eno- or -ino-. If
LOVDIN is seen as "waxing or increasing", the term very aptly
describes the period from midwinter to midsummer, when the sun is
gaining in height and the daytime increasing with each passing day.
Thus it seems certain that LOVDIN signifies "increasing". Since the
loudin series counts primarily in the six months following Samonios (in
the *matus or good months), this etymology would confirm that the
winter solstice occurs in Samonios.

LAT: *latii: "days".

This term abbreviated as LAT occurs in the second intercalary
month, where the number of days in the year is given as LAT
CCCLXXXYV (385). It is clearly cognate with the Irish neuter io-stem
laithe "day" (Thurneysen 1946: 180) derived from the IE o-stem */ Oto-
"day" (IEW: 680).
