Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 7

line averages about 2.5 unciae Drusianus below the edge of the top
rim. The ANTENOVX lines are established at about 3.25 unciae
Drusianus (midway) between the month-name lines. After making the
month-name lines and the columns in this fashion, they filled in the
numerals for the first 15 days in each month. Then they started at the
top of the next month-name line and numbered backwards towards the
middle for the ATENOVX days. They filled in ATENOVX in the
space left between the two 15-day counts for each month.

The engravers then made all of the TI marks, followed by the
M’s. Next they made the left-hand lines for the D’s, but stopping where
N occurs in place of D or MD for more than one day in a row. For
example in Cutios year-1, the D lines stop at ATENOVX IV and four
N’s are made, one at each of four the next five days. The D lines are
then begun again at ATENOVX VIII, but shifted slightly more to the
left than previously. In other months the left line of each N, particularly
starting in year-2, lines up with the left line of each D. Thus for each
letter a line is simply ruled out for each day of the calendar and the rest
of the N or D is left to be filled in afterwards. But one should note that
the letter lines in ELEMBIV year-3 are rather poorly ruled out.

To the right of the D’s or N’s, the B’s of the D AMB’s and the
R’s of the N INIS R’s often line up in a column, as if these were all
made at the same time for a given month or column. The last items
made were the drill holes for the movable pin or pins.

The reconstructed text of the Coligny calendar presented here
followed these measurement patterns to the same degree observed in
the surviving fragments. Thus the reconstruction can be seen to be one
which is not forced upon the calendar, but one which is compatible
with the actual design plan, engraving techniques, letter size, and word
spacing patterns of the original engravers of the calendar.

Monthly and Yearly Time Reckoning

Although the patterns apparent in the notation have already
been outlined elsewhere, a brief description of the function of the solar
and lunar counting schemes found on the calendar is necessary to
understand the working of a recently-discerned D-AMB or AMB
moon-rise counting scheme. This AMB scheme appears to utilize the
same type of logic as the schemes which apparently kept track of the
solstice dates. It also provides a logical explanation for the function of
this term AMB. However, the scheme must be put forward as only a
suggestion since the pattern of AMB is simple enough that it is possible
that it fitted some other function or is purely random. The credibility
