34 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

of the terminology of the calendar in describing its function, a working
supposition is that the term indicates that day 15a is missing. More
likely, however, the day itself is not indicated, but the missing total of
30 days is indicated. The first stem is probably divo- “day”, and the last
element -iomu is probably the dative of a numeral suffix (most likely
for the 15™ or 30").

Thurneysen (1899: 527) saw here *di-vertomu with the main
root cognate with Welsh vert- cognate with Breton gwerz "prix, valeur"
with the negative suffix di-. However, if the reconstructed fuller
abbreviated form *divo-ert-iomu or *divo-er-tiomu is correct, Thurney-
sen's etymologies cannot be correct.

The full phrase clearly functions to refer to the missing day 30
or the missing total of 30 days in the incomplete *anmatus months. The
next element following divo- may be *er- from *per- "to drive or bring
over, to set over, to flee" (IEW: 816) perhaps with the t-expansion as
in Latin pOrto- "drive, offer, bring". *Divo-ero-, *divo-eri- or *divos
ertos would then be a “lost day" or a "set-aside day”.

In DIVERTIOMV following Duman in year 1, the suffix -iomu
would appear to be the same ordinal suffix as that in oc(t)iomu and
deciomu. This equation then suggests an analysis as *divo-erto-tiomu,
*divo-ero-tiomu, or *divo-er-tiomu. TIOMV would then be an
abbreviation for an ordinal numeral as in OC(T)IOMV and DECIOMV.
Considering the shared connection to day 30, TIOMV may be the same
numeral as in the TIOCO of TIOCO-BREXTIO, with TIOCO- for
*trioconto-, thirty" and brextio- indicating "going in place of". Here
TIOCO is probably an abbreviation for the cardinal numeral and
TIOMV an abbreviation for the ordinal numeral. These correlations
then suggests, in any case, an expansion of TIOMV as *TIOTIOMV
from *triocontiomu, again in the dative "at the thirtieth", with -iomo
the ordinal suffix as above. We may then see the expansion of the
abbreviation *divoertiomy first to *divo-er-tio-tiomy and from this
expression extrapolate to *divos er(...) triocontiomv "a lost day at the
thirtieth". In this extrapolation the *divos and the *triocontimu are
more certain than the *“ertos , *eros or perhaps even *eris, etc.

EXO: *exo(?...?): "extraordinary".
This term occurs as EXO, and EX. It is used to describe the

ivos "feast" days on Dumannios 1, Anagantios I, Giamonios 1, and
probably on Rivros la as well. It is used to describe the main feast day
