Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 35

in the group of IVOS feast days in the period in which the sun was
apparently rising in the sky. What is signified here is probably a word
beginning with Gaulish ex- from IE *eghs- "out" (IEW: 29), as in Latin
ex- "beyond", equivalent to Irish ess- and also found in Irish ectar
"extra". Whatever the root beginning with O-- that followed, the
significance "extraordinary" would seem likely.

IVOS: "feast".

This term occurs as IVOS, IVO, and IV. Except for the
displacement into the previous month during the year following an
intercalary month, IVOS occurs ina fairly regular fashion (see Olmsted
1992: tables 7-9). IVOS occurs from two to five days before and after
the beginning of Samonios (1M), Dumonios (2A), Anagantios (4A),
Giamonios (7A), and Elembivios (10A), and from three to four days
before and after the beginning of the ATENOVX of Rivros (3M).
IVOS also occurs on Simivisonna (M8) day 9, and on the first 3 days
and day 25 of Edrinios (M11). In both instances of its single-day
occurrence IVOS 1s indicated by the fuller phrase SINDIV IVOS "this
day ivos".

On analogy with the Irish term oenach, used to describe the
Irish quarter festivals of Samain, Imbolc, Beltain, and Lugnasa, which
occur three days before and after Nov. 1, Feb. 1, May 1, and Aug. 1, a
pattern similar to that occurring for IVOS, Thurneysen (1899, 530)
suggested the significance "feast" for ivos. It seems likely that ivos
does denote periods of festivity. If so, ivos may well derive from the
reduced form of IE *jeu- "preparation of food" (IEW: 507), as in
Welsh iwt "mash, broth" from *iu-té.

LAGET: *lagetos: "waning, diminishing".

This term occurs in the phrase PRINNI LAGET as LAG,
LAGE, and LAGET (as in months 1-2-5, 2-2-5, 3-2-5) and is used to
label the first eight days of the lager series of solstice counting marks.
The first PRINNI LAGET begins on day 1 of the seventh month
Giamonios (A7), an ANM month, and counts through the ANM (29-
day) months. The count increases by one day with each laget month,
continuing on through day 7 of Giamonios and day 8 of Equos, so that
