16 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

and Rivros 4 at Rivros 10a. To emphasize that such an exchange has
taken place that this is actually day 10a or Rivros rather than day 13,
the usual Roman numeral has been left off of the beginning of this day,
the only instance of leaving off the day number on the calendar. Clearly
DECIOMIV “the tenth” goes in place of the expected XIII “the
thirteenth”.

Even without the DEVCORIV of Rivros 12 year 1, correctable
to DECIOMIV on analogy with OC(T)IOMV above, one may
reconstruct the form [DECIO]MIV for the ordinal numeral designation
of the day now found at Rivros 13 year 2, since we know that this day
was transferred from Rivros 10a year 2. The form [DECIO]MIV
guarantees that the R or RI of DEVCORIV should be corrected to an M
and that our surmise, above, was correct. This reconstruction would
then project a Gaulish ordinal numeral *deciomo-s, *deciamo-s "the
tenth" corresponding to IE *dekemo-s (IEW: 192), an alternative to the
attested Gaulish decametos, decometos corresponding to IE *dekm-to-s
(IEW: 192). The La Graufesenque sherds give decometos as well as
decametos (Lambert 1996: 131). Latin preserves a similar form
decimus "tenth" (see Buck 1933: 230-1), but an older form decumus
also survives. As a Celtic form *decuomios seems less likely than
*deciomios, the I is probably a better reading than the V for the
DECIOMIV/DECVOMIV indicated by conflating the forms on the
calendar. I would speculate that all these ordinal numeral forms in
-iamo- or -iomo- applied only to the days of the month, while the other
forms in -am-eto- applied to adjectival applications of the ordinals.
Otherwise, we may be simply viewing a dialect variation or an
archaism.

Since Rivros day 4 originally comes from Rivros day 13, one
would then expect the ordinal numeral for day 13 to occur here. If
BRIC is seen as an error for *TRIC, just as PRINO above at Samonios
2a has been seen by all observers to be an error for *TRINO, the
reconstructed ordinal form is clear. Combining BRIC, [..]ICIO, and
[..... IOMV gives *TRICIO and *TRICIOMV. *TRICIOMV could be
seen as an abbreviation for *TRI(TIO-DE)CIOMV "from the thir-
teenth", as in Latin trédecim "thirteen" and decimus "tenth" (see Buck
1933: 230-1). However, one should note the Latin ordinal tertius
decimus "thirteenth" and Greek tritos kai dékatos “thirteenth” with
both the "three" and the "ten" given in ordinal form. The Irish form is
tris deac "thirteenth" (‘the third of ten"). One would then have to
assume a form on analogy with Latin duodecimus "twelfth" and
