38 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

M: MAT: *matus or ?*matis?: "good, orderly, perfect, complete,
auspicious’.

This term occurs frequently as MAT, MA, and M, and once in
a clear reading as MAT in the third line of the first intercalary month.
Here is an abbreviation presumably containing the Celtic root mat-
"good, complete, perfect, lucky, orderly", as in Irish math, maith" good,
excellent, skilled; prosperity, wealth". This Celtic root mat- also occurs
in the Latinized Gaulish personal names Mata (Lambert 1995: 142) and
Matidonnus (IEW: 693) and in a Latinized inscription in a dative o-
stem (Buck 1933: 180) to the Gaulish DEO RATAMATO (Olmsted
1994: 439). The root mat- in these Celtic words and names derives
from IE *ma- "good, good time, orderly" (IEW: 693). However, Irish
maith is clearly an i-stem (Thurneysen 1946: 226) as is the Gaulish
stem mati-. As it only occurs once on the calendar, it is possible that
MATYV is an engravers error for *MATI. However, Evans (1967: 229)
feels that the stems in -o and -u are simply variants for the more
prevalent stem in -i. The personal names in -u, such as Matumaros
(Evans 1967: 229), are mostly ambiguous and could refer to the Celtic
stem matu- “bear”, as could the deity name Matuberginnis (Olmsted
1994: 356) if this refers to a place name “Bear Mountain” rather than
a functional name “Good High One”. It is a toss-up whether or not to
correct the single occurrence MATV to *MATI or leave it as evidence
for a Celtic u-stem with a significance similar to the Latin u-stem
mātū- in mātūrus “correct time, full term, perfect, ripe” (IEW: 693). In
this case the u-stem would be simply a variant of the i-stem. Here I
have used the expansion *matus rather than the corrected expansion
*matis. In any case the significance of the term is clear.

The term MAT, MA, M is used to describe the months which
always have 30 days and count in the waxing solar pathway. It is also
used to describe all of the even days and certain of the odd days (see
DIVOS) within the *matus months. The months which do not always
have 30 days are labeled as ANM months for *anmatus "incomplete,
unlucky, imperfect, unorderly".

M: MID: *mids: "month".

This term occurs as MID or M before each month name, but
also in the first intercalary month as MID X[II], indicating that 13
