Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 33

tion for the nominative singular so that only the masculine forms *diios
and “divos are possible for the nominative singular and not the neuter
form *diion suggested by Lambert (1996: 112) or the neuter form
*divon, which Thuneysen (1946: 217) suggests lies behind the Irish
indiu. If the word signified by DS also occurs in DIV-ERTOMV,
DIVO-RTOMV, which semantically indicates the loss of day 30
(ATENOVX day XV) in the ANMATVS months, then the only form
of these two which is possible is *divos. I think it is transparent that the
expanded abbreviation *DIVO-ERTIOMV, always used to indicate
“the missing day 30" or “day 30 absent”, contains a reference to the
term “day”, which here can only be *divo-. Verifying this is the single
occurrence of the form DIB (1-12-29). As Evans (1967, 155) has
pointed out in examining the deity names Bormos, Borvos, Borbos, v,
m, and b interchange freely in Gaulish, perhaps suggesting lenition. In
this case, DIB- would simply be a variant of DIV-. The nominative
singular abbreviation DS then determines that the DIVO- stem
indicated on the calendar corresponds to a masculine word *divos
rather than a neuter word *divon.

These various abbreviations for *divos are used to indicate
three categories of days. (1) Inthe MATVS months the days of the first
fortnight, excluding days 5 and 11, along with the even days plus day
1 of the second fortnight are all labeled as M D for *matus divos “good
day, lucky day, orderly day”. In place of M D, *matus divos is
occasionally indicated by D M, D MAT or MAT D (on some days of
Intl), and DS MAT (in the presence of NS as in DS MAT NS or NS
DS MAT). (2) Inthe ANMATVS months these same days are indicated
simply by D or DS (in the presence of NS) for *divos "day" alone. (3)
Days 5 and 11 in the first fortnight and the odd days from ATENOVX
day 3 on are indicated by D AMB or DS AMB (in the presence of NS)
for the both the MAT and the ANM months.

DIVERTIOMV, DIVORTOMV: *divo-ert-iomu or *divo-er-tiomu:
“2in place of the lacking ?30?th day?”.

This term occurs as DIVERTOMV, DIVIRTOMV, DIVER-
TIOMV, DIVORTOM, and DIVORTOMV. These forms suggest the
differential application of abbreviation. If so, combining these forms
suggests a fuller abbreviated term *divo-ert-iomu or *divo-er-tiomu.
Variations of this abbreviated phrase always occur in place of day 15a
(day 30) in the 29-day months. Considering the practical nature of most
