Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 15

with seeing ordinal numerals naming the origins of these dates which
independent analysis shows must come from the days the abbreviated
ordinals indicate. This is after all a calendar. In English we also say,
“Jim returns to school on the fifth of September.”

The abbreviations in the month names, many removing letters
from the middle of words, as in Wm. for William, show that the
abbreviations in ordinal day names are of the expected types. Thus the
month Semivisonns occurs in the nominative singular abbreviated as
Simivis, simivi, and in the genitive singular abbreviated as simis,
simivisonn, simivisonna. Year-1 provides simiviso, simivis, simiso,
simivi. Year-2 provides semiviso, semi. Year-3 provides the additional
variant simi. Year-4 provides semivi, semiv, sim and the corrupt form
[sem] bv for [sem]iv. Year-5 gives the additional abbreviation /si/mivs.
Dumannios has dumanni, dumani, dumann, dumn, dum. Anagantio has
anagan, [an]agtio, anagantio, anag, anagtios. Samonios has samon,
sam, samoni, samo, and smo. I think that one can see that these ordinal
numeral day abbreviations are consistent with other abbreviations on
the calendar (such as occur in these months names).

The term DEWORIV G PIVRI for DECVORIV G PIVRI or
DECI/ORIV G PIVRI occurs on Rivros 13 in year 1. Here the C is
written over top of the left hand fork of the V making the reading
ambiguous as a correction to CI or CV. The apparent L in the alterna-
tive reading DEVO R LVGO (suggested by Pinault 1986: 427) is
simply the result of the engraver mistakenly starting to chisel out
another D, as the I of RIV occurs directly in line with back side of the
line of D’s indicating divos. The G is very close to an O which 1s
almost but not quite closed. The PIVRI is clearly a mistake for RIVRI.
I think that what was intended here was *DECIOMIV G RIVRI or
*DECIOMV G RIVRI, with the M misinterpreted as a RI at some stage
in the transmission process and the phrase misconstrued and recon-
structed as DECIO RIV G RIVRI. Year 2 has [...JMIV G RIV - IVO
and year 4 has [....][V - G - RIVRI, [....], so that the reconstruction
DECIOMIV G RIVRI or DECIOMV G RIVRI “from the tenth G(...)
day of Rivros” for year 1 seems safe enough. This reading can scarcely
be doubted, once one understands that this day was transferred to its
present location on the calendar from Rivros 10a..

No TI mark is associated with this day date, as indeed no mark
should occur on either Rivros 10a or 13. As we have seen, Rivros 4 was
transferred to Rivros 10a. This transference then suggests that first
Rivros 4 and Rivros 10a exchanged days, followed in turn by an
exchange between Rivros 4 and Rivros 13 (1992: table 7d). Such an
exchange would place Rivros 13 at Rivros 4, Rivros 10a at Rivros 13,
