46 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

"

S: *sons or *sonns: "sun".

The term sons or sonns occurs in the phrase CIALLOS BIIS
SONNO CINGOS, which occurs at the beginning of the second
intercalary month. Here sonno is clearly a genitive, probably of a u-
stem or a consonantal stem, with the loss of final -s. The phrase sonno
cingos probably indicates “the course of the sun’’.We must remember
as well the genitive of the month name S[IMIVIJSONNA, if this does
contain the same root. This suggests a nominative *sons. In any case,
the meaning of SONNO is clearly "of the sun". It must represent a
development from IE *sun- "sun" (IEW: 881), although the usual
Insular Celtic forms derive from IE *sauel- (IEW: 881), as in Welsh
haul. Avestan xəng “sun” from IE *sųens provides a parallel form to
the *sons apparently found on the Coligny calendar. Gothic preserves
both forms sauil and sunnŌ, so it would not be surprising if both forms
were found in Celtic as well.

TIOCOBRIXTIO: *trioconto-brixtios: “a day to make up thirty”.

The attested forms are TIOCOBREXTIO, TIOCOBRIXT,
TIOCOBREX, TIOCOBR, and TIOCOB. As I previously indicated
(Olmsted 1992: tables 39 and 40), these day are to be used in place of
days 30, 31, or 32, which are necessary for the counting scheme but do
not actually exist. BREXTIO, BRIXTIO is probably a development of
the IE root *bhrē- "transferred, carried, go in place of" (IEW: 128), but
with the abstract suffix form -ek-tio- appended to it. The significance
would seem to be "the day which goes in place of" or “a day to make

up”.

Since, as we have already seen, day 30 (15a) is implicated in
this "going in place of", TIOCO- is most likely an abbreviation for
*T(R)IOCO(NTO)- "thirty". *TRIOCONTO- comes from *trio-
"three" (EW: 1090) and *komt- "ten" is used in the numeral com-
pounds of ten (IEW:192). The form is close to the attested Gaulo-
Roman ablative plural TRICONTIS (Latin trigenta with neuter plural
trī, see Buck 1933: 231), but is even closer to the Greek triākonta
(from *triā-). The Irish form is tricho and the Breton form is tregont.
Rather than Greek influence here in *TRIOCONTO-, I would simply
see another possible instance of an archaism. Again in trio-, an -o-
occurs in place of an expected -a-.
