Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 25

symbol é was available but for ē only é was available, etc., creating
confusion whenever ē, ā, or ō was called for in the text and è, à, or ò
were used instead. The standard PIE phonetic symbols utilized by
Pokorny were also unavailable in column mode. Therefore it is
justifiable to return to the etymologies of some of the more important
recurrent terminology whose significance can hardly be in doubt.

Because of the more or less random unsystematic technique of
applying abbreviations on the calendar, dropping internal as well as
ending letters (as in SIMIVIS, SIMIVISO, SIMISO, SIM, SIMIS,
[SIJMIVS for the month name *SIMIVISONNS) functional under-
standing has to precede etymological speculation. Without first
producing structural tables, who could guess the significance of terms
such as TIOCOBRIXT and TIOCOBREXTIO for
*T(R)IOCO(NTO)BRIXTIOS, TRINO and TRINVX for
*TRI(TIO)NOVX, PETIVX for *PET(VAR)I(ONO)VX, and OC-
IOMV for *OC(T)IOMV, all of which are now known to contain
numerals.

The significance of the terms utilized on the calendar first must
be determined through analyzing the function of each term in the
operation of the calendar. Such an analysis of the function of the terms
is, of course, impossible without first reconstructing the complete
operation of the calendar as whole. Such a reconstruction was
accomplished in my 1992 study. Thus, with this understanding of the
calendar’s operating system as a background, I return again to the
problem of the highly abbreviated terminology on the calendar and its
significance. Only when the functional significance of each term has
been determined is any attempt made to ascertain an expanded form of
the term and a possible etymology. Any attempt to analyze the
significance of terms without first analyzing their function on the
calendar is worthless. Nor, can terms be analyzed in isolation without
studying their relationship to other terms on the calendar. Thus it is the
fundamental operating assumption of the analysis presented here that
only after the meaning of an abbreviated term first has been established
through a complete analysis of its usage on the calendar can one
attempt to expand the abbreviated term to its probable original full
form, and only then can one attempt to establish an etymology.

The shifted days with written-out ordinal numerals indicating
which days they were shifted from provide prime examples of the need
to examine the terms in their zusammenhängend relationship to each
other. The degree of abbreviation, the corruption in the transmission
