24 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

the Gaulish hour is less certain, but it would seem to be implicated in
a possible counting scheme which is repeated in every month of the
five years indicated on the calendar. Furthermore, since the notation D
AMB is fixed throughout the entire calendar, like ATENOVX it must
relate to the constant lunar or 30-year phase of the calendar. It must be
dated to the earlier phases of the calendars development and thus,
presumably, predate the Roman conquest.

Terms Utilized on the Calendar

Through the projection of structural tables for all the notation
on the calendar one may discern the function and significance of the
various daily terminology (as in my 1992 study). Every item of
reconstruction rests upon the same footing, the discernment of patterns
in the remaining fragments which can be projected to completion on
the missing sections. Through such a process the calendar can be
reconstructed to a state containing 99% of its original notation before
it was broken into fragments. The functioning of virtually all the
calendar’s notation thus can be explained, including the smallest details
of distribution. With this functional understanding plausible etymolo-
gies can be projected for most of the calendar notation.

Pinault in his review of my 1992 study of the calendar called
into question my interpretation of the etymological significance of
some of the terms on the calendar. “En résumé, on a ici un travail trés
stimulant et qui fait beaucoup progresser la recherche sur le comput
celtique méme si on peut rester réservé sur l'interprétation calendaire
d'inscriptions rares ou uniques” (Pinault 1996: 709-710). For the
significance of the month names, other the Samonios, Giamonios, and
Equos, which are certain, all etymologies must remain speculative. My
1992 suggestions for the month names are probably not less valid than
any one else’s suggestions. I see little need to return to them here.

For the recurrent terms apart from the month names, their
function determines their significance. With the determination of the
function, plausible expansions and etymologies can be given for the
terms themselves. Nonetheless a problem is apparent in the phonetic
symbols utilized for the etymologies given in my 1992 study. This
problem arose from the limited character set available in column-mode
in Word Perfect 2, in which the original tables and text for my 1988
and 1992 studies were developed. The work had to be printable from
diskette so that no hand corrections could be made. Thus for é the
