2 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

contains a large number of abbreviated terms describing the day-to-day
operation of the calendar, much of it in a seemingly archaic dialect of
Celtic. Most of these terms have a clear functional context so that their
meaning is not only discernable but verifiable. Because of its signifi-
cant astronomical and linguistic implications, the Coligny calendar is
undoubtedly the most important inscription from Celtic Europe.

A total of 5 years are arrayed on the calendar plate from
Coligny, comprised of 62 months made up of 5 repetitions of the 12
lunar months and 2 intercalary months (see plates 3-5). Except for the
first 5-year phase of a 25-year or 30-year cycle, when the first
intercalary month is not utilized, each 30-month period (2 ½ years) is
preceded by an intercalary month on the calendar. The intercalary
months then immediately precede either the normal midwinter month
SAMON (*samonios) "summers end" or the normal midsummer month
GIAMON (*giamonios) "winters end". The intercalary months
(Column-1 and Column-9 of the Coligny calendar) are utilized to
achieve a realignment of the sun and the moon vis a vis the days
counted out by the calendar, which are based upon, but during the stage
of the calendar’s final 25-year-cycle slightly longer than, the lunar
cycle.

Since only 40% of the original five-year Coligny calendar
survives as a fragmentary mosaic (plate 2), the reconstruction of the
original whole must depend upon recognizing repetitive patterns in the
daily notation and filling in the missing sequences in these patterns
which can be projected onto the lacunae. The patterns apparent in the
recurrent notation on the Coligny calendar already have been set forth
in my earlier publications. The most significant of these patterns is that
discerned in the schemes of the TII and the N lunar/solar counting
marks and their associated notation. Unlike the N notation, the pattern
in the TII marks (plate 1) only became clear after first determining the
original positions of the shifted days, some of which are specified by
ordinal numerals indicating their original day positions (see my article
in JIES: XVI (1988), nos. 3-4, pp. 267-339; also see review by Claude
Lamoureux in Etudes celtiques: 30, 1994, 313-315, who compared the
importance of this article to that of the earlier article of MacNeill in
Eriu X: 1928, 1-67).

Pinault, one of the coauthors along with Duval of RIG: Il: Les
Calendriers, has also accepted my reconstruction of the original pattern
in the distribution of these TII marks and their associated terminology
(in a review in Gnomen (1996), vol. 68: 706-710), although indicating
reservations about some of the etymologies for rarely- or uniquely-
occurring terminology indicated on the calendar (which I had suggested
