Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 27

Thurneysen 1946: 250). On the whole the ordinal forms are as close to
those of PIE as they are to the attested Gaulish forms, suggesting an
archaic language of culture of the Gaulish calendar priest, as Sanskrit
is the language of culture of the Brahman priests of India and Latin that
of the Catholic priest of Spain, Italy, and France.

No valid etymology or even significance can be suggested for
any term on the calendar without first determining how that term
functions within the overall working of the calendar. Even valid
etymologies for the month names cannot be suggested without first
determining what present months of the year they roughly correspond
to. It is clear, even without reference to the significance of LOVDIN or
LAGET, that the PRINNI LOVDIN counting scheme corresponds to
the half of the year when the sun is rising in the sky and this count
takes place between SAMON and GIAMON. The PRINNI LAGET
counting scheme corresponds to the half of the year when the sun is
lowering in the sky and this count takes place between GIAMON and
SAMON, It follows necessarily that the winter solstice occurs in
SAMON and the summer solstice occurs in GIAMON. Such is simply
a fact of nature: the sun daily rises in the sky between the winter and
summer solstices and daily lowers in the sky between summer and
winter solstices. Since the root sam- “summer” is apparent in SAMON
and the root giam- “winter” is apparently in GIAMON, SAMON can
only indicate “the end of the summer half of the year’, and GLAMON
can only indicate “the end of the winter half of the year’. Irish samain,
presently falling on November 1, ends the samrad half of the year, and
beltaine, presently falling on May 1, ends the gemrad half of the year
providing close parallels, so one need hardly belabor the case.
However, on the Coligny calendar, SAMON corresponds to the winter
solstice and not to November 1 as with Irish samain. With the one-day
progressive fall-back of solar time every 25 years with respect to the
Coligny calendar or Plinius’s Gaulish calendar, the Irish festivals
apparently gradually became out of sync with the solar year, account-
ing for the present dating of the Irish festivals.

Knowing the fact that SAMON corresponds roughly to
January, makes it clear that Pinault (1962: 149) and Lambert (1996:
110) must be incorrect in seeing the significance of the name of the
eighth month SEMIVISON, corresponding roughly to August, as
“milieu du printemps” corresponding to Old Welsh guiannuin “spring”
(<*ųes-ant-eino-). Since Lithuanian vasarā  (<*ųes-r-) means
“summer” and derives from the same IE root, clearly there are other
