Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 41

does not normally appear. Thus the notation NS goes in place of the TII
mark.

When NS is used in place of the TII mark, the only minor
change in the associated notation is that DS is used in place of the
usual D. It is possible that DS stands for *divos sonno, but as pointed
out above, no point of separation (-) 1s ever used between the D and the
S. Since divos does end in -s there is nothing to support such a
supposition. At any rate, every day is already a *divos sonno, "a day of
the sun". The most likely surmise is that like D, DS simply is another
abbreviation for DIVOS. In support of this, 1t should be noted further
that DS MAT or DS MA is used in place of normal D M or M D for
*divos matus "a good day". Thus we have NSDS in place of D, NSDS
MAT or DS MAT NS in place of D M or M D, and NSDS AMB in
place of D AMB. The only significant notation is then N - S, *novx
sonno, in place of the TII mark.

The implication is that something happens during this special
night, the *noux sonno, to cause the sun to fall back a day with respect
to the calendar in its assumed falling back by 12 days each year. The
calendar designers then apparently assumed that the sun travels
backwards all night to begin the next day at the same point with which
it began the previous day.

NS is used exclusively for the anomalous day count and in the
three *noux sonno days transferred into the intercalary months on days
7a, 8a, and 9a. In the first instance, it clearly takes the place of the TII
marks. In the second instance, its function is clearly to account for the
three days the sun is assumed to stand still at the solstice.

N INNIS R: *noux innis(...) rii: “night of an ?...? moon”.

This term occurs as N INIS R, N INNIS R, and N INR. The
distribution in the first half of the month averages 1.4 occurrences in
the months in which it is found, falling on day 7 + 2 days. In the second
half of the month it appears on average on 1.9 days in each month in
which it is found, falling on day 8a ± 2 days. The term does not occur
in Equos and is absent from the first half of the month in Edrinios ,
Cantlos, and Samonios. It is absent from the second half of the month
in Semivisonna, Equos, Elembivios, and Edrinios . When N INNIS R
is found in the first half of the month it selects the odd days. It occurs
in both the first and second half of the month only in the period from
Dumannios to Giamon, following the same distribution as EXO IVOS,
