12 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

To keep track with the sun the TI] counting scheme must limit
the 30-month count to 27 days. This limitation is achieved by the use
of alternating anomalous day counts, which occur every other time the
solar fall-back count reaches day 28 (see 1992: tables 28b-d). In the
anomalous count the ANM months are used in the loudin half of the
year in place of the normally utilized MAT months, and the MAT
months are used in the laget half of the year in place of the normally
utilized ANM months. Rather than skipping forward and adding 3 days
at the solstice, the anomalous marks then count days 29 and 30 around
to day 1 for the next solstice in Samonios or Giamon. Through such a
scheme only 27 days are counted in each 30-month period (Olmsted
1988: table 10a; 1992: table 32).

The distribution of the marks TII, ITI, and IIT are determined
by the latest of these solstice counting schemes, for which these marks
actually form the counting sequence (1988: tables 6a-b). The greater
complexity of this TII counting scheme is in itself an indication of its
final stage in the developmental sequence. Rather than a TI mark, the
notation prinni loudin and prinni laget count out days 1 to 8 of the
solar pathway for the first 25-year cycle. Although the TII marks have
a distribution analogous to that of the N found in the N-counting
scheme, the reconstructed sequence of the mark TII simply continues
the counting pattern from days 9 to 30 of the prinni loudin and prinni
laget notation. But note that the ITI and IIT marks, which begin at days
2 and 3 and go through day 30, count out the second and third 25-year
cycles respectively.

The total scheme for the whole TII, ITI, IIT series generates
marks at 510 days (of which more that 200 survive, distributed
randomly because of the random mosaic of the surviving pieces of the
calendar). Thus for the first 25-year cycle, prinni loudin and its
associated TII marks count the 30 MAT months found in the 5 years of
the calendar, and prinni laget and its associated TII marks count the 30
ANM months. For the second 25-year cycle the ITI marks do the
counting, and for the third 25-year cycle the ITT marks do the counting.

Since nearly 200 marks survive and fit this simple recon-
structed pattern, also found in the PRINNI notation, there can be no
doubt in the reconstruction itself. The pattern is perfect with all of the
marks either surviving in their proper place and sequence or fully
reconstructable with lacunae in the appropriate places. With the
possible exception of the distribution of D AMB, the reconstruction of
the TII marks is perhaps the most certain item on the calendar.

However, with the conclusively-verified total of 1832 days in
a 62-month period, as noted above, the moon runs 1 day ahead of the
