30 Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar

The MAT months also count out the LOVDIN "waxing" solar
pathway, and the ANM months count out the LAGET "waning" solar
pathway. One should note that the quality of the day, D or M D iS
always transferred with the solar path mark TI. Thus the significance
"propitious" and “unpropitious" for MAT and ANM must arise as an
aspect of the relationship to the solar path. The MAT "propitious”
months all count in the loudin "waxing" solar pathway, and the ANM
“unpropitious’ months all count in the Jaget "waning" solar pathway.

ATENOVX: "(fortnight of) returning night" or "(fortnight of) increas-
ing nighttime”.

This term is used to divide each month into two fifteen-day
periods (Irish cóicthiges and French quinzejours “fifteen days",
partially equitable to the English fortnight "fourteen nights"). For the
ANM months the second fortnight has only 14 days (except for Equos
which has 15 days in years 1, 3, and 5; 13 days in year 2; and 14 days
in year 4).

Lambert (1996: 112) suggested that ATENOVX may be
analyzed as *ateno VX, where VX stands for the number 15 and
*ateno- stands for *ate-noųᶖ o- “renouvellement’, thus a“‘recommence-
ment of 15 days”. Although intriguing in isolation, this suggestion
makes little sense in the context of the calendar, where day 15 is
always written as XV, as in the normal usage for Roman numerals, and
never as VX. Furthermore, NOVX apparently is already found in the
abbreviations TRINVX and TRINO for the expanded term TRI(TIO)-
NOVX< “the third night”, where the context and significance of tri(tio)-
as “third” is certain. The second element in this abbreviation thus must
be noux. Since noux is independently verifiable as occurring on the
calendar, it is elementary to analyze atenoux as the common prefix ate-
and noux. Mac Neill (1926: 16) suggested the significance "return of
night" for atenoux, perhaps after Nicholson's 1898 etymology from
*qtenouxtion "period of further nights". Here then ate- would go back
to IE *ati-"over, beyond" (IEW: 70) and would relate to Irish aith-
"again" and Welsh at-. In the context of a calendar with enumerated
days (and nights) it seems certain that NOVX derives from IE
*nokų-t-s "night" (IEW: 762), as in Irish i-nnocht "tonight" and Welsh
nos "night". The Welsh and Irish forms suggests a derivation from
*nokt-s (IEW: 70), which would give a Gaulish *nox. *Atenoux,
perhaps for *atenucts, might then have developed from *atinokųts
