Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 29

divos) days contrast with the D AMB days. Here then just as M stands
for matus, AMB could stand for AM B *anmatus b(...) or AM-B *an-
matub(...) as a compound. AM could then be the compound form of
ANM anmatus. D AMB would then indicate “a day of disorderly
B(..)”. The B could stand for any number of stems. Celtic *belo-
(<*bhel-) “shining, white” (IEW: 118-119) or IE *bhel-, *bhlē “to
swell” (IEW: 120), as in here “to wax” spring to mind. These possibili-
ties would fit the D AMB moon set counting scheme outlined above.
Because of the uncertainties, however, the abbreviated term AMB is
best left unexpanded. All one can conclude reasonably is that AMB
occurs on many of the odd days, that it somehow contrasts with M for
*matus, and that it may be involved in a lunar counting scheme.

ANM: *anmatus: "incomplete, inauspicious".

The term ANM occurs beside the names of the months of the
five-year cycle which have fewer than 30 days (usually 29). ANM
alternates with the term MAT, which occurs beside the names of
months having 30 days. The term MAT also occurs in the third line of
the first intercalary month as MATV. Since MATV, if this is not an
error for *MATI, almost certainly stands for matus "good, complete,
orderly, lucky", ANM would appear to be the opposite term, as it
typifies the incomplete and apparently inauspicious months. Thus
ANM would indicate the month was "incomplete" and contained fewer
than 30 days. With near certainty ANM may then be expanded to
*anmatus or *anmatis, with an- the negative prefix as in Irish and
Welsh an- derived from IE *n- (IEW: 757-8).

The significance of *anmatus would appear to be more than
just "incomplete", however. The days of the first fortnight of the matus
months, except days 5 and 11, and day 1 plus the even days of the
second fortnight are labeled M D or MAT D. Here MAT D for *matus
divos can hardly mean "complete day", but it might signify "good day,
lucky day". If the AMB moon-set hourly counting scheme is correct
*matus divos would indicate “orderly day”, when the time till moonset
increases in an orderly fashion by an hour each day. In this scenario D
AMB would indicate a day when the orderly count did not occur, but
actually subtracted an hour from the count instead. Clearly like AMB
the significance of *anmatus must have included “unlucky, bad,
disorderly" as well as "incomplete".
