Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar 21

would imply that the Gaulish calendar originally began on the first day
of the new moon. After 1000 years of operation not only would the
Gaulish calendar have begun each month on the sixth day of the moon,
but in any given year the oscillating lunar festivals associated with
midwinter and midsummer would have occurred between 1 and 1 ½
months earlier than the actual solar events. This shift in the festivals
could have provided the impetus for the reform bringing in the 25-year
calendar.

If the Celts who settled Ireland had a calendar similar to the 30-
year Gaulish calendar, it could explain why the medieval Irish
celebrated midwinter (samain) on November 1 and midsummer
(beltaine) on May 1, each around 55 days before the actual solar event.
Over the course of some 1500 years operation, the lunar festivals
associated with the solar events would have shifted to such an extent
in the normal course of the 30-year calendar. On the Coligny calendar
samonios, clearly cognate with Irish samain, is definitely associated
with the winter solstice, which normally occurs in that month (except
during and immediately following an intercalary month.

The Possible D AMB Moon-rise Counting Scheme

The concept of dividing the daytime and the nighttime into 12
hours each was known by the Hellenistic Greeks (hŌrai) and the
Republican Romans (horae). To measure these hours in the daytime,
the most commonly utilized instrument was the sundial (Greek:
hŌrológion; Roman: solarium), which was supposedly invented by
Anaximandros (610-540 BC). This would place the concept of the hour
within the Grecian Classical phase (Rose 1970a: 253; 1970b: 1075). If
the following analysis of the function of AMB or D AMB on the
Coligny calendar is correct, it suggests that the concept of an hour was
known to the Gauls as well, who must have adopted the sundial from
the Greeks in Massalia (founded c. 600 BC).

Over the course of the 29.54 days of a lunar month, the time
that the moon rises or sets falls back approximately 24 hours with
reference to the sunrise. Over the long term this daily fall back must
average 49 minutes per day. A glance at any ephemeris table will show
that there is considerable variation from month to month in this fall
back with a standard deviation of plus or minus 17 minutes. The
minimum time, around 26 minutes, that the moon rises and sets later
each day at the new and full moons is reached close to the autumnal
